Let's move up the
stack a little bit and
talk about application
infrastructure.
On your phone or
personal computer.,
you typically launch an
application to interact with it,
especially if it's
something like a game or
a browser or a word
processing program.
No matter what type
of application it is,
it typically sits on top of
the operating system
and relies on
the services of the
operating system to
execute it and it does something.
On the mainframe, the
magic word is transaction.
The simplest way to think
about transaction is
an interaction typically
where something is exchanged.
If you were in a store,
that transaction would begin when
you say I want to buy
this and it would
finish when you walk out
of the store holding
the thing you wanted without
getting chased down.
Or if it's an
informational transaction,
like you're buying
an airline ticket,
the transaction starts
when you click to
book the flight and
isn't concluded
until you've got some
sort of confirmation
with a booking ID or
something you can reference.
Additionally, if someone
were to come along
and try to book the same
seat on the same flight,
they wouldn't be able to
because you already got it.
What I'm getting at is that
at the business level,
it's important that there be
a clear beginning and end
point of a transaction.
The same goes for
all the smaller technical
transactions that
make up the overall
business transaction.
The characteristics of a
transaction can best be
described by how they adhere
to the ACID properties.
ACID stands for
Atomicity, Consistency,
Isolation, and Durability.
One at a time.
Atomicity, that's a
way of saying that
either a transaction
happened or it didn't.
Since its transaction can have
multiple smaller steps of
transactions within it,
it's important that
all of those complete
before we consider
the transaction done.
So there's no way to go back
later and say, well, actually,
we took your money,
but we never actually
gave you what you wanted.
Consistency means
that the database
or the data related
to a transaction
only moves between
one valid state and
another valid state
and at any time,
all of the data can be frozen,
gone over with a fine-tooth
comb and it would all
checkout and make sense
according to its rules.
An inconsistent
database is one where
bad programming could
potentially leave data
in unacceptable places or
update values in undocumented
or unsupported ways.
Number three is isolation.
It's generally understood
that a system will have
lots and lots of transactions
happening at the same time.
There's a fair amount
of scheduling and
threading and magic that
makes this all possible.
Isolation is a measure of how
smoothly a single transaction can
happen without being affected
by all the other
transactions around it.
This isn't necessarily a
performance statement,
but how often am I going to
run into tables that
are locked because
other people are using them or
seeing data that is
meant to be temporary?
Put another way, how well can
the system scale while
keeping complexity down?
Then D, durability.
How permanent are
successful transactions?
Sometimes software crashes.
Maybe someone thought
they were logged
into the test system
when they were actually
logged into the production system
and they brought down database,
or maybe a cable got pulled
that wasn't supposed to get
pulled or someone backed a
forklift into a [inaudible].
Stuff happens.
Anyway, the transactions
that went through,
will they still be there
when the system comes
back up or will you have to say,
hey, anybody who made updates in
less 30 minutes should
check and make sure
they're still there.
You don't want to do that.
That is the measure
of durability.
You've got all four
things; atomicity,
consistency, isolation,
and durability.
You've got yourself
an excellent platform
for important business
transactions.
This is an industry-wide concept.
It's not just the
mainframe thing.
You can look at any solution
and consider its acidity.
So if I were looking
for an ACID property
that ensures that all the
data in a database is valid,
explainable, and done according
to the documented rules
for that database,
which ACID property would
you be looking for?
That's the consistency property.
Without it, you get
transactions halfway done,
money being withdrawn
from one account without
going anywhere else and all
sorts of other bad stuff.
So consistency,
pretty important because once
your database is corrupted,
any further work could
be deemed invalid.
On the mainframe, a
transaction processing Manager
or transaction manager
exists to tie together
many transactions
that are required to fulfill
a larger transaction.
So in this example,
the travel agencies sits here in
the middle and exists to
make sure that you get
booked on the flight
you want with
the hotel reservation you wanted
and you get car rentals
where you need them.
For the consumer, the
transaction isn't
complete until
everything is complete
and you feel confident that
your vacation or
business trip is booked.
So what magic makes
this possible?
In the next lesson,
we'll dig into some of
the middleware that powers
transactions on the mainframe.